[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here with
somebody that i've been dying to talk to
for a very long time the extraordinarily
talented
best-selling author many times over
chuck palahniuk chuck welcome to the
show hey uh tom thank you for asking me
dude i am really excited uh so glad that
it lined up with your most recent book
the invention of sound
which was a very much has your
fingerprints all over it there's
something very unique about the way that
you approach story and character that i
am
deeply affected by and entranced by
and
the first thing i want to talk to you
about and i feel like there are going to
be many directions that we will go in
the chorus of this conversation not the
least of which you promised we're going
to talk about ted bundy
but
is mental management so
in reading your works you take a
really
raw look at some seriously hard to look
at things which then in my research got
me trying to answer the question why
and
you talk about cognitive reframing you
talk about chewing on things that bother
you are unchangeable and yet you can't
live with them and that's sort of where
your writing begins and so i thought
that would be a pretty interesting place
to start
you know
people i find make the mistake
of thinking that you have to write about
your issue
uh to be writing about your issue
they kind of overlook the fact that no
matter what you're writing about you're
writing about your issue
so
no matter what the shiny subject is
you're eventually if you do it right
you're going to fool yourself into
exploring something fantastically dark
because there's a reason why you are
attracted to the shiny subject so you
can never get away from writing about
yourself and writing about your
unresolves
so you might as well just accept that on
the face of it
how much of like the human psyche do you
think is is about dealing with the dark
stuff like are there people that just
sort of walk through
life and they're not bogged down by that
and it's just a particular kind of
person that finds themselves um with
those unresolved as you call them or is
is that darkness that unresolved just a
natural part of the human psyche and
everyone is going to deal with it
uh yeah everybody's dealing with it but
i always uh
i always get really nervous around
people who are always cheerful and and
uh enthusiastic all the time
because they're the people who seem to
be the least effective at dealing with
it
um
and i find them just incredibly
exhausting these people who are just
being clever
because i see clever as just this
ongoing way of sort of denying
uh
the issue at hand rather than dealing
with it
and so
i feel like my my life is wasted when
i'm around people like that
i would much rather
be around the people who want to talk or
you know
who want to risk looking bad
because when i'm around people who are
just looking good
just telling their hero stories
um
i feel
like i might as well be watching
mainstream uh television or or so much
so much media that is so heavily
marketed and filtered
and sent through test audiences
that it's like this fantastically
processed cheese
there is nothing left to it
uh
yeah there's nothing to be to be gained
from it there's nothing raw about it
anymore i'm really interested in
in that
need to process that humans have in
finding um that
you're extraordinarily good at finding
the sort of dark underbelly
story that everybody has and i don't
know if you are good at getting them out
of people or if
um
if you help people let their guard down
or you just seek those people out who
are willing to talk about them i'm not
sure but like guts
uh which i didn't faint when hearing you
read it but dude that like really that
changed my blood pressure i was tingling
it was so
uncomfortable and
the glee that you get when you have a
chance to read that to people i find
utterly fascinating um is there
something that you're revolving around
there in terms of your own unresolved
like what
give people like the quick glimpse into
what guts is and then tell me why that
one is so iconic for you
in order to read guts publicly you have
to shed
all human dignity
no seriously
we are
you know you talk about how we human
beings are meaning making machines we
are also looking good machines and we
are machines
that just spend all of our time
trying not to be dominated and trying to
look good oh [__] you i've never heard
anybody say that before sorry to
interrupt you trying not to be dominated
trying not to be dominated by everything
around us
and to a certain extent trying to
dominate in a kind of proactive way
but when you go up there in front of
people and you read guts
you are
it's worse than taking your clothes off
you are completely humiliating yourself
and
there's a fantastic power in that it's
like doing this
complete emotional striptease
where
you are left with nothing
no no shred of dignity
and you have completely debased yours i
have completely debased myself when i've
read that story
and what's remarkable is when you read
it to young people
young people's only access to power is
in literally looking good
is in having a great deal of vitality
and energy and in physically being as
attractive as they can be
because they don't have a lot of
education they don't have a lot of
resources or connections yet
so their their main access to power is
looking good so when you go up there
when i go up there see i keep switching
to second person because i have to
displace the whole experience
but when i go up there
and i risk looking really bad
and being humiliated
i show them a kind of power that they've
never considered before
and i give them a freedom to present
their worst self or the time that they
really messed up badly
and so the magic of guts is afterwards
in that 14 hour signing line when people
come up and they tell me
the thing that they did
that was as bad as guts
because they've never told anybody this
and they've never felt safe telling
anybody this
and so the magic of guts is that
i give up any pretense of looking good
and so i give other people just that
little window of of
doing the same
that is so intriguing to me so i i'm i
had in researching you the experience
that people are having now listening to
you that haven't heard guts yet
and i just kept hearing you mention it
mention it guts guts this and and i
thought i just need to hit pause and go
find a version of you doing guts and so
i went and watched it
and
honestly chuck when i went into it i was
like
i'm so impervious to that stuff like one
of the interview questions that i do
when people interview with me
is i ask them when was the last time you
were offended
and the reason i asked them that is it's
a barometer for me of like sort of
emotional resilience and if you're easy
to offend it just won't be a good
long-term fit with me
because i consider myself almost
impossible to offend
and
things like words just don't get under
my skin now if seeing something visually
that could definitely be distressing
which is why i was so curious to know if
you'd seen sick
the uh
the life and death of bob flanagan super
masochist because that was hard to watch
but i didn't think there were going to
be words that you could have written
down on a piece of paper that would
change my physiology and oh boy was i
wrong
and
feeling myself get that like sense of i
want to look away i mean obviously there
was nothing to see but i wanted to look
away from the ideas you were presenting
to me
and i just thought whoa like how do you
how do you go there what would drive you
to write that to want to spend that much
time with it
and
in researching you you threw out a line
one time and i couldn't tell like if you
were just joking or if that's like
really the thing that makes guts so
interesting to you and you were like oh
i don't have self-esteem at all and i
was like that can't be true like he has
to be joking but
if
guts is you
dealing with that to sort of lessen the
emotional response of like i'm just
gonna go up and be sort of emotionally
bare naked in front of people i'm gonna
do it over and over and over until
wanting to look good or please people is
no longer a thing is that why you keep
coming back to it
you know this kind of bridges to another
topic that we had discussed getting to
and that is the idea that
i think
that you have to sacrifice your life for
something and i wrote a line in a story
once where a character
resolves to do something with the idea
that history can live without one human
being
i don't matter
uh history can live without me
and once
you accept that
that that your life that my life is
going to be about this one thing
then
it's kind of an honor to go up there and
to ritualistically kill yourself by
reading a story that nobody in their
right mind would present in public
um
it's just a kind of a wonderful sort of
hairy carry or ritualized sacrifice or
suicide
and that all comes from deciding
at probably around the age of 30 or 31
that
whether or not it was the right or the
wrong decision i was going to throw away
the rest of my life
writing fiction
yeah that history could live without one
person
a that's a powerful insight
b it's a it's a pretty interesting story
that you come to riding so late in your
life uh if i remember right around 32 33
you're working uh in a diesel shop if
i'm if i have the sort of timelines here
correct
um
this idea of committing yourself to one
thing does that bother you at all that
that we can only essentially live one
life
no you know
it
at first it looks like this
fantastically limiting thing
i can't commit to one thing
because
the opportunity cost would exclude
everything else
but the irony is that by committing to
one thing
it's given me a life that is so much
larger than i ever could have imagined
when i was trying to be a kind of
generalist
a journalist who was going to kind of do
a little bit of everything
but by focusing on one thing i've got a
bigger life than i ever ever could have
imagined for myself
so if i'm being honest i think the
there may not be anything in my life as
aggravating to me as
having to choose one life and i i really
believe in the need for people to
recognize that i believe that it's super
important that people embrace it and i
always give people
from a life perspective of look here's
the perfect analogy you're standing in a
room with a thousand doors and
your job is to close 999 of them and
that's that's where people get stuck is
it isn't even that they go through one
and don't like it it's that the idea of
the opportunity cost of closing the
doors is so paralyzing and i bring that
idea up because i am the guy standing in
the room having a hard time closing the
doors
and there are precious few things in
life that irritate me as much as that
and i'm not sure like what sort of open
wound that is that i'm trying to process
through and i've been able to do it and
as a result um you know i've got a lot
of worldly success but i'd be lying if i
said that i'd gotten over the irritation
of
like i really for a long time until this
year i was obsessed obsessed with living
forever because it was the only way i
could come to grips
with
that okay if i have to do one thing at a
time at least in a sequence i could do
these sort of infinite things that i
want to do
may i ask how old you are you may i'm i
just turned 45.
okay
boy
i i i just turned 59
and i've kind of reached the cusp where
the idea of living forever like a
vampire
is one of the most unpleasant things i
can conceive of at this point
because we
we're kind of constantly fed this idea
as children we're kind of fooled into
the future
that the future is going to be this
fantastically unfolding happy
thing and that's how we're kind of
baited to kind of move forward
when in fact at a certain point you
realize
that uh
that it's kind of a lie that we are kind
of lured into
this
this future we think is going to be a
constant improvement progress
when in fact is just more and more
levels of conflict
and so in a way this kind of choosing of
one thing to immerse myself in
is a way of kind of escaping that but
also being present to it in a kind of
very dedicated way
that i can't escape it fully because i
live in it it is the water in which this
fish swims
but i can't choose one aspect of it and
really unpack that and explore that with
the help of a lot of other people
and
maybe come up with
a really kind of breakthrough different
way of being
yeah and that i think is creative people
we're looking for
to to model a kind of social behavior
or kind of social structure or just a
way of presenting ourselves and
perceiving the world that if it's really
effective people will adopt it
and part of modeling it is to
depict it in a narrative in my case
so that
people can kind of see the benefits of
it
and maybe begin to live their lives
according to this new kind of way of
being or at least to perceive the world
around them
in this new way
and if we can do that really effectively
then
you know that would be kind of the
wonderful miracle is to create the game
rather than kind of hoping that the game
goes on forever
i want to play a thought experiment with
you that i do on myself a lot
so i have a hypothesis that
people's lives are to an
extraordinary degree
dictated both emotionally and in terms
of whether you're happy or unhappy and
in terms of what you actually do and
accomplish in your life it's determined
by your frame of reference
i'll define your frame of reference
simply as the things you believe you're
capable of and are true about yourself
and the things you believe are true
about the world
and when that frame of reference is
self-defeating people are pretty unhappy
right i'm stuck the world's against me
i'm stupid i'm not going to be able to
accomplish
um
versus somebody who's
maybe steeped just completely in
delusion i can do anything i want the
world is my oyster
and they're going to be much happier i
mean just looking at the neurochemistry
you could probably take a vial of blood
and know
you know which one of them holds sort of
what world view based on
for guys anyway testosterone levels and
things like that
and
when i think about okay you've got this
frame of reference and
i want to know is my frame of reference
empirically true is it is there
um sort of inherent usefulness because
it is a more accurate map of the real
world or is this frame of reference if i
could merely change the frame of
reference would it change how i feel
would it change my behavior so i play a
game called you're a brain in a vat
and all of your memories are fake and so
whenever i'm tempted to spiral out of
control to feel really negative about
something i'll remind myself no no
you're just a brain in a vat now what
that does it's so radically shifts my
perspective because now i don't need to
beat myself up over things in the past
those were just memories implanted i
don't actually believe this this is just
a thought exercise but these are just
memories implanted in your brain to give
you enough context you're like human ai
you have to have context that will push
you in some direction
so if you don't like the direction that
feeling badly about your past is pushing
you in then just change it because it
was all fake anyway now i'm completely
aware that that is just a thought
exercise
but as soon as i feel that little bit of
relief of what it would be like if that
thing were fake then i'm like the only
nothing about my physical reality has
changed nothing about the external world
has changed it is only my perception of
who i am where i come from that changes
and even though i'm aware of just
playing a game i can feel relief so i'm
like well if i feel relief then i need
to cognitively reframe whatever it is
i'm thinking about that now pushes me in
a new direction now i bring that up
because if you were to play that game
and i said something like no no you
really are going to live forever or all
that stuff in your past isn't real you
were born right now in this moment would
that change the way you think about the
future
it's funny i don't think i really think
about the future
um
and i've heard you say this before i
kind of a different version of
this and it was something to the effect
of so what
and that was andy warhol's mantra
whether he got good reviews or bad
reviews he would think so what it
doesn't change anything so what
he just kind of lived in this
in this sort of ongoing
minimizing or negation
of either praise
or or or damnation
how does that change anything it doesn't
and so he was always sort of allowed
himself to be drawn toward the thing
the shiny idea the the bright thing that
drew him
rather than be a reaction to his past or
reaction to his present circumstances of
whether or not people were praising him
or not praising him this this constant
philosophy of so what
and a lot of people call that getting
back to zero or getting back in some
cases to empty and meaningless kind of
extracting all of the kind of value
judgments and meaning from
from the moment
so that you can
give yourself the permission to pursue
the thing that you want to pursue
that is not based on living forever or
it's not based on escaping a terrible
childhood
you're just drawn toward the thing
that's attractive
rather than
uh
trying to earn something
my best writing teacher tom spanbauer
whenever he he started a workshop he
would say
if you are if your idea is to write this
book or write this story in order to
something in order to
make your dad happy or in order to make
some money or in order to
win a prize you should not be here
you should only be in this workshop
if you're writing because you love to
write or you love the process of writing
uh if you're writing in order to be
published
and gain
you know
celebrity
you shouldn't be here
you you should be here because you love
to do this thing
and the outcome is almost beside the
point
and so in a way that's where i'm always
trying to come from
so that
i i don't feel kind of uh
hobbled by someone else's agenda
and my success isn't dependent on
somebody else's
uh
you know decision of whether or not they
like my stuff
i hope that answered your question to
some extent
it does
it leads me to a follow-up which is
so
do you
worry at all or or it's not even that so
i want to better understand the frame of
reference that you have now 59 years old
you've dedicated yourself to one thing
um
and it's helping you discover and create
something that might actually change the
way that people interact with the world
oh no no that's a that's kind of a
byproduct
that
that would be nice
but really
in the here and now
it's about giving me
a kind of thing to be obsessed about
because i have to be obsessed about
something
and as a creative person you get to
invent your own major problems
um
because if you don't invent your own
problems and then
seek to arbitrarily resolve them
then the world is going to give you
problems
and so i'm always able to choose a
gigantic
gigantic problem
that allows everything else around
you know organizing my taxes
and meeting all those day-to-day
obligations it makes all those things
so not important you know i do them
but i don't
i don't suffer over them
because i have bigger fish to fry even
though those bigger fish to fry
are are of my own choosing
and if i do it right
then i realize that this seemingly
arbitrary
huge problem i've chosen
is actually my most deepest
kind of secret neuroses that i would
never share with the world
and by the time i'm done with this giant
thing
i've exhausted all of my emotional
reaction and attachment to this
huge unresolved problem
and the problem just disappears
so
it may look like i'm just sort of
farting around with make-believe stuff
but i'm actually taking my big giant
thing out into the world
and
and resolving it and making it disappear
and there's something so fast
fascinating about that because so often
when people read my stuff
they don't recognize that it's their
giant problem too
and if i do it right
then they suddenly found this new
freedom
and they're not even sure
how it happened
um
in the new book the invention of sound
what is the big problem for you and i
don't know if you're comfortable talking
about it but what was the big problem
for you obviously i know the the
straight narrative of the book but what
was the big issue for you that you were
chewing on with that one
boy
sometimes i don't even know it for two
or three years after the book is done
and then i am absolutely mortified what
i put out in the into the world and i
hope that nobody ever figures out what i
was actually talking about
ah invention of sound
on
the most basic level i'm always
fascinated with how um
human beings and our experience are
commodified
and turned into something that can be
bought and sold
and even our most intimate lives
become kind of data mined and bought and
sold
that something we've clicked on once
suddenly starts popping up on our screen
every time we log on
and that the whole world is buying and
selling
these very private things these things
that used to be so intimate
uh
and among those is
is the sort of the manner of our death
it becomes a sort of a commodified form
of entertainment for other people
sex certainly certainly has
and so in invention of sound i wanted to
kind of reinvent what i think of as
tableau horror
where
in typical tableau horror you come
across crime scenes you come across
butchered people
and
you don't actually witness the violence
but you see a kind of forensic
interpretation
a narrative imposed on the violence and
then maybe at the end of the whole thing
you see a little bit of violence
and so tableau horror would be a da
vinci code the alienist in the alienist
you're always coming across
a ritualistically butchered child
prostitute
but it's always after the fact
and so
i wanted to do tableau horror but i
wanted to do it with sound
the the most intimate sound that you
made at the moment that you
met your death
uh
i was at the end of my very long
driveway in 2012
and
i was waiting to turn right
onto the highway
and coming down the highway this very
long twisting mountain highway was a
truck
and it suddenly went up on
two wheels and it was gonna flip
and it was gonna land right on top of me
it was a truck full of broken concrete
and construction debris a huge tractor
trailer coming down the hill at 70 miles
an hour
and
in that moment
as it toppled and onto my prius a little
white prius
i thought i'm really glad i've got
a good
a good will in place
and
all my legal stuff is handled i really
thought that i actually thought that
and i felt really good
that i had lived so many years doing the
thing i loved
but the embarrassing thing is i made a
noise like a squeak toy
like your dog would chew on i made
a little
shrill shriek
like a mouse
and
the truck crushed my car and knocked it
off the highway into the woods whoa
swatted it and the car was all crushed
around me
i couldn't get out for a long time
but i have never forgotten that sound i
made and i was so glad that nobody was
there to record it
but i wanted to write about
the last sounds that people make before
they die
and
in that commodified way
how those sounds would be bought and
sold and how they already were to some
extent because
so much of the the screams that you hear
in movies
are these kind of cliched recordings
that have been around since the 1930s
and 40s
and are now used as a kind of uh
sort of a trope like an easter egg to
hide in movies oh the will and wilhelm
scream
that there are these institutionalized
screams
that are kind of an industry joke
but i wanted these screams to be the
actual screams of people
uh
and it was until after the fact
that i realized that that was kind of
something from the john travolta film uh
blowout broken arrow or blowout and the
book i thought you said broken arrow
what no because i didn't i'd never seen
blowout with john travolta and nancy
allen
it was a brand of palma film
and
it uses one of the devices i use in the
book and i was just mortified that i had
used something that was already in a
brand diploma film
but i didn't know it until
two or three years after i'd written my
own book
uh
yeah anyway
i on the most basic level i'm always
writing about the commodification
of human experience
because that's something you find
unsettling
i find it kind of heartbreaking and it's
something that that martin heidegger the
german philosopher always wrote about he
said
once we start commodifying
trees and animals it's just a matter of
time before we commodify each other and
we can modify ourselves
and i used to think that people went on
johnny carson because they were friends
with johnny carson
and it it really wasn't until i was 35
that i realized no you go on those shows
because you're booked
to go on those shows
and the producer knows the anecdotes
and will feed you the tosses so you tell
those anecdotes
and your job is to basically sell
yourself
and
in doing so sell your product
that it suddenly made all of life seem
completely not special anymore i just
made everything seem like the
marketplace
and i can't fix that but i can't explore
it and i can't exhaust my emotional
reaction to it
and then find some peace around it
by writing books
it's really interesting to me
um that that you have a big reaction
from that i
was the exact opposite when i discovered
oh people go on shows they're booked oh
they tell you like what anecdotes they
rehearse that i felt like
i just learned another piece of how the
world works
and
my youth was marked by a deep
misunderstanding of how the world
actually works
and so for me it's always been
this
just thrill of
oh my god like i understand another
piece like okay the you know there's
these secret groups and they get
together and there are certain things
that they control like that's so crazy
and i can't believe that's real but i
don't have uh
and i don't i don't say this as i think
it's a good thing but i don't have
this sense of
tragedy
when i see something that i don't like
i'm more i feel empowered because now
whether i think it's a good thing or a
bad thing i understand it and once i
understand something i'm not going to
fall prey to it or at least i'm going to
fall prey to it a lot less
and
that has been like
my whole life has been about cobbling
together
i always say skills have utility
meaning like if you get good at
something you can actually do something
with it and that's one of those
statements that's so self-evident that
it i can tell it never lands with people
and i just want to like stand up and
scream no no like once you understand
you can get good at something and
literally shape the world around you
make more money help more people like
whatever your thing is like if you get
good at the right thing you can you can
really move things around
and
so
because i've struggled with sort of a oh
wow i totally misread that did not
understand how that went and then as i
get it i'm okay now i can move around
like the biggest sort of hilarious
misunderstanding in my whole life was
with women i was terrible with women
and
finally discovering what it meant to
embody confidence and then therefore was
able to begin dating and actually have
uh
a functioning sex life it was
so eye-opening
and i don't know that and many other
things just got me hooked i'm like okay
i just need to figure this game out
you know and i understand figuring out
the game
but there are some kind of
i feel it's this kind of precious
attachment to
uh
to something magical in the world
that you know
as a kid from the middle of nowhere i
really thought that the the world was
somehow much more magical
everywhere else
uh that there was really smart people
making the decisions
instead of just really well connected
people
a lot of times it's not the smartest and
the most sort of creative people who get
things out into the world it is
the most connected people or the people
who make the
thing that is mediocre enough to sell to
a gigantic gigantic audience
it's not about
the best thing it's about the thing that
will appeal
most readily
uh to the largest you know market share
and it's really those are tough things
for me to be with
yeah
i find that really really interesting um
so let's go your childhood is very
interesting to me and and i'm not
bringing up anything you haven't talked
openly about but for sure by all means
if there's something you're not
interested in talking about just let me
know but um
hearing the stories about your dad
working on the railroad and you guys
going out in the middle of the night
when there would be a train wreck and
there would be you know loose goods and
um you guys would go collect those and
he got married on top of a train if i
remember right at one point
uh
so
talk to me about the way you grew up
culminating because the the most
profound story i had about your youth
and and i can't help but wonder how much
it colors
this desire for there to be sort of a
magical world somewhere else
is that your parents used to fight
really bad and you and your
siblings would defuse that tension which
i found
incredibly interesting
we called it playing henry kissinger we
were really small kids we were like six
seven
years old
but henry kissinger was such a cultural
figure constantly sort of hammering out
a piece in the middle east during that
time
that when my parents would fight really
violently
us kids the four of us would hide in the
basement and we would decide whose turn
it was to play henry kissinger
and to play henry kissinger
typically you injured yourself really
badly
you cut yourself or you stabbed a needle
or something really deeply so that you
bled really bad and then you came
upstairs from the basement
and you were you created such a crisis
that
well we created such a crisis that our
parents would stop fighting for the
moment and they would be forced to deal
with this sort of life-threatening
bloody mess
so
in a way it's kind of creating that
distractive narrative that i i continue
to live by
yeah that when i heard that i was like
whoa a it's
phenomenally interesting how
cued in kids can be i mean at that age
to recognize okay wait we could create
this crisis moment um
go upstairs end this feud that you
wanted to end the feud uh is already
interesting if you guys were you know
sort of safe in the basement that you
had the
impulse to okay we really need to step
in and and stop this um and that you
could face the physical
pain
you know the physical pain was nothing
compared to the emotional pain of
listening to them going with each other
it was just kind of an agony of seeing
the worst aspect of both of them uh just
battling each other in such unkind ways
and so often their arguments were about
us so it would be hearing our names
uh brought to bear as weapons against
each other
how each
how each was accusing the other of
failing each of us
and so
hearing ourselves weaponized in this
sort of ongoing battle
was a a lot more painful than you know
cutting ourselves with broken glass or
something
yo my poor siblings
i don't think they would ever talk about
this they hate talking about this
but uh it's something that we all sort
of shudder over
yeah i can't imagine is has it been the
writing that's allowed you to deal with
it or
um
you always seem so comfortable talking
about hard things
you know actually there's an odd
sort of therapeutic quality in going on
the road
and being sort of asked in the kind of
therapy what like way by you
and
other people and people in an audience
and people on national public radio and
that you get used to telling these
stories so many times they really lose
their sting
and you get a distance from them
and so
uh i gotta thank you for that
is is it mere repetition or
do you have is there something about
you and the way that you view the world
you think that causes that cathartic
release
this is another thing that tom spanbauer
my best teacher
always did
his very first class
his very first meeting with a new class
he would say
i want you
to write about something that you just
barely barely remember
and people would think back and they
would put down one tiny memory
and they would find that by doing so
they would remember another thing
and they would put that down
and eventually
they could
genuinely retrieve
entire massive events from their pasts
just by putting down the one little
thing that they did remember and then
giving them the freedom
to remember the next little thing
and it was such always such a fantastic
exercise
that in a way that's what happens
answering these questions is that
is that every time i remember a tiny bit
more where i allow myself to remember a
tiny bit more
and to be free of it by you know
expressing it
and so i want to zero in on that idea of
being free from it so if it was
something that you didn't really
remember
is this that so you've delineated before
between sort of intellectual remembering
and body remembering so is it something
that you feel like okay i've stored this
somewhere this is an issue it's not
maybe consciously an issue
is that what you mean by finally being
able to let it go
no longer being reactive to it that's
what i think about being letting it go
uh
one fantastic example that occurred
recently
is
up to about a year ago i was leading a
workshop of writers
and
we were just we were all talking it was
a group of about 20 people
with ages ranging between 18 and maybe
and we were talking about a big used
magazine store going out of business in
portland oregon
and and how they would no longer be
buying national geographics and people's
lifetime collections of playboy magazine
because nobody ever throws away a
playboy magazine
and someone in the group said
i wonder if that's how the big box of
porn in the woods happens
and the entire group got silent
and then the room just exploded
because everyone in that room as a child
had found a box a bag a suitcase a
duffel bag but they had found a big
bunch of porn in a natural setting
they found it on a beach or they found
it in the desert they found it stuffed
up a tree in one case
but they found it at a completely
inappropriate age
and they had never talked about it
because in a lot of cases they had taken
it home to their parents and said look
what i found this treasure look at this
and they were just attacked and they
were so shamed and in some cases they
were forced to carry it back miles and
miles to where they had found it and in
other cases they were forced to kind of
ritualistically burn it but this thing
that they had thought was a huge
treasure
was suddenly they were punished for
having discovered it so they lost their
innocence in more in so many more ways
than just finding porn
and so none of them none of the people
at this workshop table had ever talked
about finding the big box of porn in the
woods
until someone talked about it
and then we spent
the next six weeks everyone telling
their story
and for a long time we were going to put
together an anthology
of all of these people fictionalizing
their stories because it seemed to be
such a universal
event in people's lives
and one student
uh lobbied that we should call it
children of the porn
which
is kind of the title that sank the whole
project because publishers wouldn't
touch it
um
but
it's about identifying these things
that are more or less universal i'm not
the only person that had a really shitty
childhood
but they're probably a million people
out there
who said
i played henry kissinger
i would do that i would cut myself or i
would
burn myself in such a way
that it would distract my parents from
their drama
that if i can tell the truth about my
thing
and i can do it
in a kind of
um
well-depicted if i can execute it in a
well-depicted way and and communicate it
so that other people can be with it
then i give them this permission to
realize they're not the only one and
they can come forward with their thing
and talk it out and digest it and
assimilate it as just an event
and and be with it and have have that
freedom
that we're kind of talking about
where you're no longer so reactive to it
you can't remember it you can't be with
it you can't discuss it
because i think that's where 90 of the
people are already
and you're you're trying to be the
person who
who says
yeah that happened to me so that
everybody can say yeah that happened to
me
is that a big part of what drives you
finding those areas where people feel
like okay i'm shamed around this i can't
talk about it
and helping them understand that it's
actually pretty universal
always
because those those are the stories that
i tend to take into parties or social
situations
because if i can tell my story about
workplace hazing and my first day at the
truck plant for freightliner trucks and
how i was sent from workstation to
workstation to get the squeegee
sharpener
which doesn't exist
and how
all these
big gruff
guys
swore
and swore and just
just tore into me and called me an idiot
and sent me to another big
tough guy who
called me an idiot and humiliated me
if i can tell that story
i give people the freedom to tell me
stories that are so much worse
and
and they all sort of come together to
illustrate
these fantastic big things that are are
what it really is to be a human being
because the thing that really frustrates
me
is
when i turn on streaming and i see so
many platforms and i see such a
this vast amount of stuff to watch
it's all of it so filtered and so sort
of homogenized and pasteurized
by the production process and by the
kind of testing process and by the notes
process
i've got notes on this
ah
that by the time it's on something like
streaming
again it's such a homogenized
sterile thing
that it doesn't do justice to what it is
to be a human being
and so when i go out with this story
that makes me look like an idiot and i
give other people permission to look
like an idiot
then
i'm getting an access to
really raw really fantastic stories
that really tell me what it is to be
a person in the world not just you know
a person on television
i'm going to describe how i see you tell
me if you think that i go astray with
any of this so
you seem to be a keen observer of the
human condition
you have found a niche in sort of
difficult embarrassing hard parts of the
human condition that your eyes sparkle
you smile a little bit when it comes on
to that topic and i can just imagine you
going around parties leading with these
like crazy guts like stories to see
which ones trigger
other people to join in
and
it seems to be
designed to help people process
something
to help god
it's designed to help me process
you know if i ever said it was about
fixing other people that would be a huge
lie
it's about but isn't there an element
that it has to be related to other
people
in a way it's validated by other people
uh but i have yet to to throw out any
aspect of my existence
that
isn't automatically echoed
by endless numbers of people
one one reason why david fincher the
director wanted to do fight club
was because
as a projectionist as a teenage
projectionist in ashland oregon
he worked with another projectionist
and they spliced
single frames of pornography into family
movies and he had never seen that
sort of acknowledged in the culture
i didn't do it myself but i knew people
who other projectionists who did do that
when i was a teenager
and so
there
my life is not so special
that
every tiny bit of it isn't
won't resonate with a million other
people
uh yeah that to me i think is the very
thing that fascinates me though about
you in the writing is
um
and maybe it's better just to explain
what i like about it instead of trying
to sort of read your mind what i like
about it is i feel like the human
condition is one of trying to get mental
management people are spinning out of
control they have
um confusion self-loathing ambition love
joy hatred like it's this weird
mixture of things in fact this might be
a good time to talk about um your idea
of self-soothing how everybody has this
thing that they sort of put themselves
to bed with
um and finding these universals like is
a big part of what allows people to get
a grip on the things that haunt them
because 99.99 or whatever they're not
they're never gonna write to get
catharsis they're going to hear that
person went through it too it's no
longer a secret you know like the woman
um and the heating pad story where she
was finally able to say her most
embarrassing story to you
and the the the
recontextualization that's like what i'm
obsessed with the re-contextualization
for her in that moment is quite possibly
life-changing right she goes from
dark secret it's ever present with her
she doesn't know how to shake it she
hears a totally unrelated story but it
somehow fits a genre of thing in her
mind which is like oh my god i have one
of these genres of things in my mind and
i never thought that they could be funny
i never thought that i could see the
humor in this and like i have the chills
now
retelling a very lame version of your
amazing story it's like that the way
that
as human creatures we are so social in
nature that we long to to
if we have to go through something bad
to know other people have gone through
that same thing there is so much release
in
knowing that oh my god thank god like
i'm not alone i'm part of this thing i'm
connected
and
when i read you
i'm just like
there and i i would have a very hard
time defining
the thing the rail that you grab onto
but like from page one of the invention
of sound i'm like you wouldn't even have
to tell me it was your book i'd be like
this is either chuck or somebody trying
to write like chuck it's it is so
clearly
you like you you have found this
thing that maybe we all wish wasn't true
about ourselves and yet we have to deal
with it because until we do there is
some
unrealized is probably the right word
it's the intel uh now i'm going off into
the deep end feel free to say that i'm
out of my [__] mind but like it feels
like you have this unique ability to
help people integrate the shadow into
their life
that's what i think about you
i i would agree and also maybe even
sometimes to celebrate the shadow
yeah um
and
the way i was taught again by tom
spanbauer i always going to go back and
acknowledge tom
and tom was an actor in new york as well
so his method was that you have to read
your work out loud in workshop
because when you read it out loud you
find out instantly
that it does or does not work
before all the intellectualized
feedback afterwards which i kind of
consider worthless because it's kind of
obligatory that people will say i really
like this i didn't like this would you
add a dog
you know
they have to say something but they
don't have to laugh and they don't have
to gasp
and when you read it
and you can make you can bring people to
tears
or you can create a silence
where you can stop for seconds at a time
and you've talked about this
it's so often
not the fact that we're filling up every
moment of silence
it's so often the broken way in which
you
depict something
that establishes your authority
you know two of the most
flawed presenters on radio i've ever
heard
do you remember paul harvey
yes
and now
is he
the rest of the story see see our
compulsion is to fill every moment
that we don't want dead air
you don't want to give people
that option of switching away but paul
harvey would break his sentences in
really unusual places
and in doing so he brought you in closer
and more intimately because he created
attention
and dr laura schlesinger did the same
thing
it's like she studied at the knee of
paul harvey
and she would break her sentences and
she would hold silences that were
unbearable
and nowadays
see how ready we are to jump in and fill
those silences
when in fact
it's the broken silences it's the kind
of
semi-inarticulate things that tom
spanbauer would call burn tongue things
that are stated really awkwardly
that
they give a narrative
so much more power than if it were
really polished
all right i want to go back to this idea
of integrating and celebrating this
shadow
and ask the question of why it's
important um
do you think it's i think it's important
do you think it's important
it's only important if you want to
not reach the end of your life and go
why the hell didn't i do those things
uh because
there are truths that you can only tell
at certain points in your life i could
only write fight club when i was 31
years old
it's not a book i could write right now
why is that
because i'm not that angry disillusioned
good boy
who was taught that if i did everything
if i went to school and i got good
grades and i went to college and i got
good grades and i got out and i just
tried to work my way up the property
ladder if i did all the formulaic things
then i'd be happy and successful
and you realize around the age of 31
that
you've got to start breaking the rules
rather than following them
and i had the energy and i had the kind
of
crazed friends that i needed to write
that book around
and so every book
is only something you can do at a
certain point in your life
and if you pass that point without
having done that thing
you always look back and think
why was i so gutless
you know there was that one line in
fight club where marla has sex with
tyler
and i i thought what is the most
romantic thing she could say in this
moment and that is i want to have your
baby
so marla had to say the least romantic
thing in that moment which is
i want to have your abortion
and everybody fought me on that line the
editor fought me
20th century fox fought me even brad
pitt came to me and said i hate that
line my mother's going to see me say
see me in a scene with that line
and she's going to be really offended
but
i feel unless there is a kind of what i
call the too far if you unless you go
too far
you will beat yourself up years later
for not having gone too far
uh in invention of sound
there is something
just one short sentence in one of the
first foster gates chapters while he's
watching all this horrendous porn on his
computer
and everyone fought me on that one line
but that was my too far
and i had to fight back to keep that
line
and people say they close the book at
that point
especially people with kids
they close the book they have to put the
book away
but they eventually take the book out
and they get past that moment and so
unless you go to the too far
you're kind of wasting your life in my
opinion
yeah um
i agree sort of with the intensity of
the need for it
it feels maybe slightly different from
my perspective in that
i think it is very hard for humans to
understand why they do what they do and
the one of my favorite quotes is the
confused mind says no
and when i meet people
um
the number one question i get asked is
how to find clarity in their life
what am i supposed to do what's my
meaning what's my purpose how do i find
a passion like that whole loop of like i
know i could be doing something should
be doing something whatever but i have
no idea how
and
for me it's always
the sense of self-awareness that they're
going to have to develop first even just
to understand what do you respond to
what do you like like what is it that
gives you more energy than it takes and
it won't seem like an obvious thing it's
not like anybody i don't think
encounters something first time they
encounter and goes yep this is what i
was meant to do with the rest of my life
that certainly is not my experience but
you find something that's like oh that
was a little bit cooler than everything
else around it and maybe i'll spend a
little bit more time with that and so
you invest in that
but people that
wall off parts of their own psyche
they end up not being able to and look
i'm no union
student but
the idea of having to integrate the
shadow to fully
find your own power to not be hiding
from yourself in fact one of the um the
great insights of my adult life came
from jordan peterson where he said
all right
everybody in world war ii imagines that
they're hiding anne frank in their attic
but the stats say that you're one of the
nazi guards
and when you start revisiting history
with you as the problematic perpetrator
instead of like the do-gooder then then
you'll at least acknowledge that you
have the capability not that you you're
not heroic and sure maybe in
in that moment you would risk your life
and 100 but
that you need to run the thought
exercise of what if i was too weak to do
the right thing and and that little bit
of distrust in myself has
propelled me forward in ways
it makes me
make sure that i know why i'm making a
decision it makes me ask why i feel a
certain way but it's an ugly thing to
consider like i don't want to think i
could ever do anything horrible
and yet
accepting that dude humans are flawed
man like scary flawed and i am a human
and in no way do i think that i have
transcended the trappings of being a
human and so reading your books and
getting through the hard stuff
it's like recognizing the full
spectrum of the human animal and that
feels necessary
and
and that's why i kind of argue against
people
when they say that that a character
should be likable and sympathetic
that
i'm much more
compelled by a character who is
um
corrupt but is just trying to do
the right thing
even if it's kind of a despicable thing
but it's the only right thing that the
character can think of doing
uh
yeah
i think these characters who are kind of
paragons are super likable super
sympathetic i really hate those
characters oh yeah it's interesting
because i love those characters
and i totally get the advice and in fact
many of the things i find myself drawn
to as a writer are the very things that
you hate but like that's not that's not
confrontational to me i love that you
you have gone in this totally different
direction and i would be mortified if
you were less chuck paulinek right like
i i love that there are these other
voices
um so even though i get where people are
coming from and it is a
commercialization but remember i i see
that as like oh my god that's how the
world works i get it i get what we're
trying to do the sort of
emotional resonance we're trying to
create in the audience so anyway that's
that's maybe a difference in how we
react to the magic trick um
but
yeah i find i find those characters
compelling i find that they get me
excited i find that they make me want to
be
like them
but
there's something so useful in
reading about
characters that make the bad choices but
what's interesting i hate downward
spiral stories where characters just
continually make the worst possible
choice
you avoid that
how do you avoid the sort of just boring
catastrophe of knowing this person is
going to make a wrong decision at every
step
i accept the fact that uh
the reading is not everyone's first
choice
reading is something that people tend to
go to when there are no other options
so reading
is something you do when your friends
can't get together
so reading is something that happens
typically in isolation
and it also happens
a lot of times under really poor
circumstances you're in the hospital
waiting for someone to die so you read a
book or you're at the airport
waiting for a flight and it's
horrible so you read a book
that the reading is
something that people kind of do under
duress a lot of times
so
number one i want my books to be about
people who find community
they find community with a bunch of
people or they find community with one
person so fight club is essentially a
romance
where
this person transcends his own kind of
isolation
to bond with one person
so it's got a romantic ending
so in the books
the characters always find community
with at least one other person
and
i've resolved that i'm not going to
resolve a story by killing the main
character
because the reader has to live forward
in the future
the
so romeo and juliet are not going to die
in my books
because the reader has to move forward
his or herself
yeah that's interesting i never would
have thought that that was a
rule for you
what is ultimately the experience that
you want the audience to walk away from
these books that are challenging and
confrontational like after
um watching fight club would you have
predicted or reading fight club would
you have predicted that people would go
and start their own fight clubs
hell no you know
that was the early early 90s when i
wrote that
and as i was writing it i was thinking
people will never take this seriously
people will never accept this premise
because aids is everywhere and there is
no way people are going to expose
themselves to the blood of other people
that is completely
ludicrous people will never do
or accept a narrative in which people do
this
so in a way
i never thought it would sell because i
thought people would just see it as a
completely beyond the pale
completely unrealistic thing because
blood-borne pathogens
were just everywhere in the culture at
the time
but
the other thing about
sort of working the vein of the extreme
is that if you can
lodge yourself in people's memory
whether or not they like you the first
time
if they remember you
people change and the culture changes
and people forget everything about the
circumstances in which you wrote the
narrative
and they will eventually come to accept
a narrative either because the culture
has changed or they themselves have
changed
so the idea isn't to be liked right off
the bat the idea is to be remembered
because that way you stick around long
enough
for people to
you know
sort of
eventually accept you
or accept the story
so that is one benefit of the too far
is that too far
is like a hook and a song and it kind of
sinks into people
and it keeps the story in their memory
oh one thing
we've kind of texted about alfred
hitchcock versus roman polanski
yes okay what do we remember most about
alfred hitchcock's
his whole
uvoir that's a french term
what do we remember most
from when i say hitchcock suspense
all the movies the one sequence most
memorable uh the shower sequence in
psycho exactly
and it's in black and white
she's not naked
she's not getting stabbed
and she's acting she's fake screaming
so it's all phony it's all phony
but you know
when we actually do see a woman stabbed
and we see her blood
and she's not acting and it's in color
can i venture a guess
no i think it's the only time we've ever
seen it in the history of mainstream
movies
when mia farrow has a blood draw
in rosemary's baby when she's first
find out she's pregnant
the nurse has a huge hypodermic needle
sticks it into the inside of her elbow
starts to extract her blood on screen
and mia faro has to deliver her lines
with this fantastically tense pained
expression because she knows if she
messes up this take
it's another blood draw and they're
going to keep sucking her blood out
bright red blood right there on screen
and it's going to keep coming out of her
until she until roman polanski gets a a
take
something he can use
it is one of the most tense scenes i've
ever seen in cinema
and it does everything that hitchcock
pretended to do in psycho
that is mia pharaoh's blood
and that is a real nurse
and mia pharaoh is a real person
saying a made-up line in that moment
about seeing the fantastics on broadway
and it's little true cringe-worthy
things like that
that make the whole devil worshiping
phoniness
that sell it
uh
and so it's these little visceral
moments of truth
that we may or may not recognize at the
time
but they have this fantastic way of
getting under the radar
and keeping the narrative in the culture
for
forever interesting you talk about
punctuating sort of this unbelievable
thing with something that's real i had
that same i don't remember i've seen
rosemary's baby but i don't remember it
the way that i remember the exorcist
but when she goes to have like the
spinal fluid removed
oh god that scene freaks me out to this
day like the sounds of the machine and
like when they pull the thing out and
the thin you know strand of blood comes
squirting out it just felt so real and
it was so bizarre to juxtapose sort of
the cold hard sterile science
with you know everything leading up to
that which was iconography ouija boards
demons you know what i mean it was like
really sort of old world creepy and now
all of a sudden like
what would have been for the time like
very futuristic very sterile very white
high-tech
ah man especially because they're doing
in the neck ah
you know it always freaked me out i
think that's real isn't it
is it i don't think they faked those
scenes because now that you mentioned it
i remember that but i typically don't
remember it because i usually leave the
room where i fast forward to that that
horrible moment seeing a child tormented
in that way
i think that that blood spurt is a real
blood spurt
i wouldn't be surprised but oh god maybe
the shot is such they're not using
they're not really using her i can't
remember but i can't fathom she was so
young
when they filmed that um
but really again it's those visceral
moments that sell the whole rest of the
phoniness
that without those visceral
fantastically physical what my teacher
tom spambo would say on the body moments
then everything else would seem so much
more easily dismissible
yeah who that that is uh body horror is
like a whole thing
i don't know if we have the same sort of
genre here in the u.s but in japan it's
like a whole
category of manga is body horror things
happening to almost always teenagers
makes sense because of what they're
going through
but almost always
a teenager their bodies going weird
crazy things under the skin oh
that stuff i find super freaky i
actually want to go back to what you
were saying about the aids epidemic
um
that was
something that i was just young enough
where i saw it only on the news it
wasn't like a super real thing
definitely on my radar at the very
beginning of my sex life
but by then it was already starting to
sort of lose steam
um how did that inform you what was that
sort of like up close
when i was in my early 20s
i
i was suddenly aware of death i'm not
sure why
i don't think anybody in my life had
died up to that point
but i became obsessed with the idea
that someday i was gonna have to die
and i was terrified that somehow i was
going to do it wrong
i was not going to die correctly
and so i had to explore every aspect of
what it was to die
so
i think at the age of 23 or 24 i started
volunteering in a hospice
for indigent people who had been brought
in from the street in order to die in a
kind of
home-like setting
and a lot of them if not most of them
were dying of aids
and i didn't have any kind of skills so
my job was to to talk to them and to
take them to do fun things for the last
time
so
it was about getting them into my
mercury bobcat which was kind of a fancy
version of the ford pinto
that i had had since high school
it was about taking them to the ocean
for the last time it was about picking
up their parent at the airport and
bringing their parents to be with them
for the last time
and so i basically
the only people i knew
were dying people
and i got to see
and i got to get really complete with
what it was to die
this is the process
i won't mess it up
i'll be able to do this when the time
comes
but when they took them to their support
groups
i would find the support group always
thought that i was dying of what they
were dying of
and i would have i started to tell
myself the narrative that became the
support group narrative and fight club
that someone was doing this to feel a
greater sense of aliveness
and to tell the
truth when i went back to freightliner
to the plant my terrible job that i was
working with my degree in journalism
because you couldn't get work in
journalism so i was working on the
assembly line at freightliner
i felt great
just the fact that i was not dying
made me feel so good
and uh
and there was such a a rush
that all of that
that sort of initial inquiry into death
really brought me present to life and
ultimately gave me the kind of emotional
through line
of fight club
and i can't remember what your your your
entry into that was your question i
forgive me uh no no problem at all um
you're talking about body horror
yeah talking about um
body horror but then i think that we
moved on from there i forget too as well
i was so engrossed in in what you were
saying but the aids epidemic up close
which was the thing that that really got
us there
yeah
and the stories that people would tell
me and also
there was at least one case
where the dying patient would give me
keys and say you've got to go to my
apartment you've got to go to my rooming
house you've got to throw away these
things that i don't want my parents to
find
so
i would
more or less kind of break into where
they lived
and i would have to take out the really
tawdry
filthy
uh whether it was pornography or whether
it was sex toys
it was my job to back it up and to get
rid of it
and in a way it broke my heart because
it was the most intimate
aspect of themselves that was in these
spaces
and so often
and i was burgling
this kind of profane sacred
sense of who they were
and that they would never come back to
these things
i wrote a book uh called snuff
which is about uh a woman who was
attempting to shoot the world's largest
gangbang movie
in which she plans to commit suicide so
that it will be the last gangbang movie
ever made and that she holds the record
and
in it there is a tiny little flashback
scene which is from the first book i
ever wrote that never got published
in which a guy
gets a blow-up doll
and as he's having sex with it he
realizes it's losing air
and it's actually dying beneath him
and he's desperately trying to get his
rocks off before it goes totally flat
and the moment before he's able to
ejaculate
his mother walks into the room and he
stands up with this pink limp
basically cadaver hanging off of his
erect penis like a big surrender flag
and that's where the scene cuts
but it's one of very few things i was
able to salvage from that first book
and again it goes back to these kind of
search and destroy missions i was sent
on by dying people
because
once i bagged up all of their secrets
i would be leaving their home and i
would realize
this home
could belong to anyone at this point
this is really the only thing what i've
got bagged here is this is the only
thing that made this really intimately
this person's space
now anybody could live here and now
somebody else will live here
and so
that was another aspect of of aids
uh that i found that this has really
stayed with me
is this
this being sent out to recover and to
destroy and to keep secret
the secrets of so many people who were
dying at the time and again i was 23
years old
is it a more beautiful world to you if
they let the family discover those
secrets or is it just about hanging on
as long as you can to your presence in
that space
i i think it goes back to again to uh
integrating the shadow
and kind of accepting the shadow
um
yeah and allowing other people to sort
of people who love you
and know the shadow is there
and to some extent you know
allowing them to sort of be with the
shadow themselves
in the spring of 1999 my father was uh
was was murdered and the man was sent to
prison years later
but when my siblings went up to resolve
his household
we found
half-filled prescription bottles of
viagra
tucked all over in the house
and they were like between
sofa cushions
they were basically wherever the magic
might happen dad had stashed viagra
and we would be weeping
as we resolved his possessions
and then we'd find one of these bottles
of viagra and we'd all start laughing
uh because they so humanized him in that
moment
they so presented
a really vital alive aspect of him
that
he was 59 i'm 59
so he died at my age
and the idea that we would find these
very sort of sexualized hints of his of
his love life
was really touching it really it gave us
a fantastic sense of comfort
um
we really felt like we discovered
something about dad that we never would
have known
yeah
that's interesting sex is one of those
things that it's it's so strange it is
so out of space and time
this is an idea i've never talked about
out loud i don't even know if i've
discussed this aspect of it with with my
wife see this is my job
dude i know and one of the questions i
want to ask you is why people open up to
you obviously i have my theory because
of how you make me feel
but very curious to know what your take
is
um
but there's an aspect to sex that is so
out of time and place where when you're
with somebody all the noises sounds the
way that you act all of it is is
perfectly contextualized and makes sense
but when you see it from the outside out
of context it is so weird
and
that's the
go ahead well when it's over so often
after people
have sex they start laughing
because suddenly they're present to this
fantastic absurdity
of this thing that they just were a
moment before that no longer is who they
are
that fantastic uh
transition is so always so funny and we
i don't know whether it's funny but we
just kind of laugh out a relief
please
no i mean that that's it so
you know i get
the person who
is
asking you to go into their home to get
rid of things
because
if you're dying there might not be time
to recontextualize yourself in the eyes
of whoever finds that so while some
people may find it and think it's
endearing
if the context with which they've
approached that person
is radically different i could see them
thinking ah you know it's jarring and i
don't have sort of time to
to deal with it i don't know it's it's
interesting i get the impulse to
hide it i'm i may be more fascinated by
the sort of aching beauty that you see
in it
um
why do people tell you
like the
the most the story they never tell
anybody else why you what is it about
you
it really goes back to recognizing
that our
primary drive is to look good and to be
right and to avoid being dominated
and if possible to dominate the
situation
to kind of impose
our reality
on reality
and if i can step back because once you
recognize that you realize you have a
choice you don't have to do it anymore
that you can risk really looking like
the idiot you can really be the goat you
don't have to be the hero all the time
and when you risk looking like the goat
you give everybody else a permission to
risk looking like the goat
yeah
i know a story from your life
um
that i think ties into this but i'm so
curious so
you
will go to parties and intentionally
make a mistake that makes you look
stupid
and you know you do it because you love
letting them feel smart and you know how
that moment will sort of create
neurochemistry in them
why are you doing that though
like you don't correct them later and
say no i really knew that you really let
them think you're dumb and that they're
smart well it's funny uh
it gives them such a rush it's like
giving them a present
they're so happy because they're so
right
people want to be right
and
so if you can allow them to figure out
the mystery and be smarter like in guts
when i say
it's a snake it's a sea serpent that's
come out of our pool drain
the entire audience knows it's not a
snake
and so at that moment the audience is
smarter than the narrator
what is the first thing that scarlett
o'hara says in gone with the wind
war war war it's ruining all the
barbecues there's never going to be a
war or something like that there's never
going to be a war
and so in that moment regardless of how
beautiful and rich and charming she is
and young she is
we are smarter than her
and we suddenly embrace her like she's
our child because we see that she's dumb
and she doesn't know what's about to hit
her
and so
you give people a gift when you allow
them to be right
and among my my lefty portland friends
my favorite thing
is
if somebody brings up writing or poetry
i'll i'll sort of go off on sylvia plath
uh about you know what a a bigoted
racist person she was
and it gets everybody sort of it hooks
them and they're instantly sylvia plath
wasn't a bigoted racist person
what's your proof
then i say well
she wrote the bell curve
and there's a moment of silence when
people realize
that i'm saying bell curve instead of
bell jar
and suddenly they're all instantly right
at the same moment
and they all get to attack me
and it's wonderful to watch uh you know
it's kind of trolling people
but it's
you know all of entertainment is kind of
con is kind of trolling people it's
bringing them to an epiphany or an
emotional state
in a very deliberate
calculated way
and so that's just one of the kind of
most basic ways it's like telling a joke
people don't know you're telling
uh
and it lets them be right it lets them
have the the epiphany that lets them
dominate me
uh
there's just so much that works about
that
and is the layer of that that is for you
you recognize you are sort of the master
storyteller who understands your
audience and watch i can elicit
this emotion right on cue or is it
actually i'm santa claus i don't want
anyone to know and i just want you to
feel good about yourself even if it's at
my expense
it's kind of both
yeah
you know
it is a sense that you have uh
you've mastered a skill
but it's also a sense that you're
serving an audience that you are
bringing them
you were
rewarding
their attention
um
yeah
i hate to go on tour with a story that
doesn't work
i've done it one year it was a story
that
it might have worked because people keep
asking for it
but i came home and i threw it away and
people are still asking for it decades
later
i heard it and they want to hear it
again they want to hear it again it's
kind of the lost story
but it wasn't a funny story and so
because
there was such tension and people did
not laugh
i interpreted it as a story that failed
and
the idea that you can go up there and
fail people on stage feels like such a
disservice to them that i just never
really want to do that i want to have a
story that
that elicits a whole range of emotions
and engages people physically and leaves
them kind of freer in their own skin
like throw it away
well i threw it away because
because since it was so tense through
the whole story
and it had such a quiet epiphany i never
got
kind of a sense that people
were hooked by it
uh
yeah recently people have been asking
for it i've tried to find it and it's
it's gone it's lost so if people are
looking for love nests still love nest
does not exist
that's so interesting like you and i
have very different reactions to bad
work like to me
i not only do i save everything whether
i think it's good or not i'll save like
infinite versions and make like save
them in different places to make sure
that they can't get lost i'm so paranoid
like you never know a sentence later
might be useful uh and i want or i may
never look at it again but maybe it's
just like a hoarder personality problem
but
uh that's so interesting to me that you
would throw something away i mean
especially because somebody like me who
reveres your work it's like even bad
chuck pulling it would be fascinating
so in fact do you see yourself can you
see yourself as chuck palahniuk or do
you see yourself as just a guy
i see myself as um
as a kind of disposable conduit and i
don't mean that in a kind of
self-effacing or kind of martyrish way
as a catholic
but i see myself as
as a thing
through which things pass
that in a way
i am this constant uh
sort of
gathering
this harvesting
of human experience
and then organizing
organizing that experience and
presenting it
in a narrative
so that the experience
has a context
and so in a way i'm still the journalist
that i was kind of hoping to be
but i don't keep my notes and part of my
ritual is to burn everything like once a
year
so if there's a university that thinks
that there's a big bunch of papers
somewhere there's not
there's the stories that go out and get
published
and then there's a a stove full of ashes
i throw everything away nothing what
recycling
because
ah you know
i think kafka got a raw deal
kafka wanted everything that wasn't
published burned
and his best friend
brought it all to the light of day
and i think in a way if somebody can ask
me to throw away their dildos
i want to throw away all of my rough
drafts
all of my didn't work stories
all of my sort of failed experiments i
think it's my right to to throw them
away
no question no question it is your right
uh
man that's interesting do you feel is it
just like
hey
part of the writing process is rewriting
you polish it you get better
and i would never want somebody to
mistake you know an early draft for
thinking that i thought that that was
good enough or is there like a sense of
release and letting go of getting rid of
it
what is the like what's the end game to
burning it all
i think it's more the latter
that you have to sort of
for me i have to
get back to what we talked about that
getting back to zero getting back to
sort of empty and meaningless
so that you can start the next project
without being too attached to the
previous project
and
god bless my dad but my dad always said
the only sex advice he gave my brother
and i
he said don't dump the one you're with
until you're dating the next one
which is probably why he had viagra all
over his house
and so part of
completing a previous
book story whatever
is starting the next one falling in love
with the next idea
so that no matter how the previous ideas
is received
i'm no longer emotionally attached to it
i'm dating the next one
and so part of
losing that attachment is destroying all
the notes destroying all the drafts
uh everything
so that there's no trace of you know
that thing in my life anymore wow do you
have any anxiety when you go to do it
no none whatsoever
that's so interesting oh
no
wow
super fascinating i could literally just
keep bugging you about that one until
the end of the time but we will move on
uh
why did your dad get killed
oh
you know
if i want to be really metaphysical
about it
my dad get killed got killed
because it was fate
when my dad was a small child
his father
and there's a lot of theory his father
supposedly had a head injury
but also his father was always a little
unstable
his father went nuts
and
killed
his wife [__] my grandmother
and tried to kill my father and his one
brother who were home at the time they
were both small children
what's that i was just gonna ask what
age oh i think my father was
i want to say he was four four years old
he wasn't in school yet
and he and his younger brother were both
home
and the rest of their siblings i think
they were 11 siblings were off at school
but he spent the day trying to find my
father to kill him
and my father hid under a bed watching
his his father walk around
with the barrel of the rifle
looking for him and calling for him
until he eventually killed himself wow
so
my father was
in the house yeah the house that we used
to spend summers visiting
my mother never told us
and when she finally told us
about the murder suicide we asked what
room it happened in
and she said do you know that yellow
bedroom off the kitchen
and that was the room that us kids
always had to sleep in every summer
and she said
i always hated turning the lights off
and leaving you kids in that room
because it had no windows it was just uh
almost like a large closet in this very
uh up in the mountains
sort of uh
very
more or less it was like a log cabin it
was a very small very rough house
anyway
my father
was married many many times and he was
kind of always trying to find the right
woman
until he answered a personal ad in 1999
and the headline of that ad was kismet
which is the arabic word for fate
and it was a woman
looking for a man
and he started dating this woman
and she had been a lawyer in the prison
system in the midwest
and she had married a prisoner that she
had helped
get parole
and the prisoner had subsequently
i believe he had molested her daughter
from a previous marriage
so she was
pressing charges to send him back to
prison
but until he was back in prison
she more or less needed to date a really
big guy
who could be her bodyguard
and i only know this motivation because
her daughter came
to me during the trial
and said you know i'm really sorry
my mom
chose your father because he was the
biggest guy who answered her personals
ad
wow
she was just looking for a bodyguard
and
on what was more or less their first
date they took a a road trip together
he was leaving his house in the
mountains which he had cleaned up
meticulously because he was eventually
going to bring her back there
so everything was completely clean and
neat
but as he was leaving a huge boulder
dislodged from the hillside rolled down
and blocked his driveway he almost
missed his train to pick her up
but he was able to leverage this boulder
off the driveway
and he even made a little sign
uh
proclaiming it kismet rock he was going
to be the the landmark to their new
budding relationship and he put this
sign on the boulder
and then he went
he picked her up
and when he took her back to her house
at the end of this this road trip
her ex-husband
was waiting for them and he shot them
both
and as they were dying in her house he
set fire to the house oh [__]
and their bodies were only preserved
because they were on the first floor of
the house and a large bed on the second
floor fell through
and the
unburning mattress
covered their bodies
so my father who had spent that horrible
afternoon of his childhood hiding under
a bed
from a man with a gun
who'd killed his mother
ends up
shot by a man with a gun
under a bed
with the woman he's found at the end of
his life who ran a personal ad called
fate
and then not even a boulder blocking his
driveway could stop him
from having this rendezvous that ended
with his death
so the whole
perfection of it
made it
had an odd comfort to it
and maybe i'm just a kind of imposing a
kind of inevitability on it because you
know i'm a writer and writers do that
they create a narrative that allows them
to
you know
continue living
but there
is a kind of level of coincidence there
that would shame even e.m forester who
was a writer who
just you know exploited coincidence
enormously
and whether it's something i'm inventing
or not
uh
it can't kind of it always
makes dad's death
seem like an inevitability rather than a
horrible tragic
you know
accident
well crime
whoa that is a
very crazy story
you talked about narrative and how we
make narratives that i think the words
you just said were to go on living
um
talk about soothing narratives
you collect people's soothing narrative
stories um as you relate it to me in
text it was so foreign to my experience
i want to know more
what are these stories that people
put together that soothe them what is it
with the repetition and the sense of
trying to exhaust themselves
i thought i was the only one that did
this
but ever since i was a small child
in order to fall asleep i would run
i typically the same scenario through my
mind
and
and it was usually about
some sort of being in a huge fight
and more often than not i would lose the
fight
and
that scenario would exhaust me so much
that i would fall asleep
and there are studies with olympic
wrestlers and martial artists
that show that if they lose a match
their testosterone levels plummet
but if they win a match their
testosterone levels rock it up
and the theory is that if you lose
your testosterone levels fall so that if
you're injured you will not get into
another fight too soon
you will give yourself time to recover
and so if possible the narrative that i
was running in my head
was always to end up being beaten in
some competition
so that
my my body chemistry
would sort of collapse and i would fall
asleep
i never told anybody that story i never
told anybody that
and then one day another writer in the
workshop i was in at the time the
thriller writer chelsea kane
she started talking about
self-comforting stories
that children
well into adulthood tell themselves
basically the same scenarios
as a way of self-comforting so that they
basically lull themselves
to sleep through a mental process
and for a lot of people they're very
sexualized stories that's how they
exhaust themselves
and a a big faction of people
it's stories where they drive themselves
to tears
they think of
the most increasingly sad things they
can imagine
until the point
on purpose
until they cry themselves to sleep
and
chelsea told me she writes about serial
killers
and basically all of her books
are her
presenting her self-comforting stories
in a kind of you know packaged
commodified way
and that's the thing that brings her
back to writing them it's not the fact
that this is her profession or people
love these books
is the fact that these books are all
chelsea kane's self-comforting story
that she will be attached to for the
rest of her life because it serves her
in this really basic functional way
and so
that's another kind of universal thing
it's harder to introduce in a party
setting because people don't want to
talk about something so intimate
um
but when i can get people to talk about
it
it's amazing how people have learned to
put themselves to sleep
since they were really itty bitty
children
that's really interesting i did not know
that people were doing that
when i was little i
the only thing i would do is just think
about the universe and that was sort of
the one recurring thing because i was so
freaked out by this notion of an
expanding universe and my little head
just could not
get around that idea and so i guess i
would
think about that until i was tired
enough and fell asleep but i never
thought of it as like something i was
doing to comfort myself or anything like
that
um
that's really interesting they're just
called self-comforting stories when in
fact they're kind of an emotionally
exhausting story
uh it's about kind of exhausting anxiety
uh in a consistent way
neurochemical management like that to me
is
is such a fascinating part of the human
experience the things that people do to
um
deal with trauma to deal with uh
repeating ideas they can't get out of
their head i had a sleep expert on them
so surprised this came from a sleep
expert but i had a sleep expert on and
he was talking about how
they're just now really beginning to
discover why we dream and that there's a
hypothesis now that has some pretty
profound data to back it up
that a huge part of the reason that we
dream obviously memory consolidation but
the more interesting part is that
what the phase of rapid eye movement
does
is strip the memory from the emotion
and
what you find and it's um
nora noradrenaline is the chemical that
you can track so most people when they
go to sleep noradrenaline plummets they
dream in this very low noradrenaline
state which is like the fight-or-flight
chemical and
so they're repeating you know going back
to your idea of repeating over things
and that it loses its power you do that
in your dreams so you're going over and
over and over this very traumatic event
and when you do it with your
noradrenaline levels low you come out
and over you know six months or a year
all of a sudden that you've worked
through it you've as he says you've
taken the sharp edges off and so now you
have the memory without the emotional
intensity but if you take somebody with
ptsd
for whatever reason when they're in rem
sleep they can't lower the noradrenaline
levels so now they're revisiting it over
and over and over at the same heightened
emotional level and so it's just baking
in and baking in and baking in at that
super intense level and i thought well
that's so interesting because
the new research that they're showing is
you take somebody you put them on mdma
have them revisit a traumatic event and
now because you've got the
neurochemistry essentially of love you
love yourself you're accepting you're
positive you feel connected and you have
somebody revisit a traumatic event
they're able to do that cognitive
reframing that you talk about
and i just thought man this is a game of
neurochemistry like this is
to me all of life is a game of
neurochemistry and i'm constantly
reminding myself you're having a
biological experience and when i attack
it good well i've always thought that um
the storyteller storytelling was the
same kind of digestive assimilated
process the dreaming was
because
people quit telling a story once it
loses its juice for them you know
if you're not a professional
like a comedian who knows the joke
always works
you tell a story because it works for
you it gives you
there's still kind of an unresolved bite
to it
but once that is gone once the story is
sort of stale
you quit telling it you've completely
digested it and assimilated it as part
of your identity this thing that you
could not accept previously
and so i've always thought that dreaming
and
storytelling
was more or less the same process
and there is a writer steve almond who
said that teaching writing
is
basically the talk therapy of our time
because people used to in talk therapy
they would tell their story over and
over until they completely wore it out
and at that point they could move beyond
it
but talk therapy was so expensive
that drug companies
chose
pharmaceuticals instead it was just
cheaper than paying for a lot of talk
therapy
and writing teachers have since found
that when you put people into a workshop
and you force them to tell their story
as a craft exercise it's kind of you're
removing the emotion from it you're
turning into a very empirical very
calculated crafted thing
then a thing that has to serve the
audience instead of serving the teller
the think that has to have a replicated
uh
you know
response
then you are turning it into that sort
of unemotional thing that you're talking
about in in your dream state
and you allow people to sort of
very rapidly
get through their their their [__]
by turning it into a craft exercise a
writing exercise
so i totally agree with that dream
hypothesis
yeah it's uh it's interesting how deft
the mental mechanisms are but also
terrifying how often they break
when i think about childhood trauma
man um do you know who gabor mate is
no i think you'd find him interesting so
he works a lot with childhood trauma
addiction
and um i was asking him what's more
important the first three years of life
like would you rather have somebody who
was loved in the first three years of
their life taking great care of touched
hugged red to just all the expressions
of love that a human being can give
another one but then the rest of their
life is difficult or would you rather
the first three years are an absolute
atrocity they're not touched enough
they're not nurtured they're not taken
care of but the rest of their life they
are
and he said that it was a really
terrible question and he hated me asking
it but
uh if he had to answer that he thought
it was better to get the first three
years right because then at least the
person will be resilient enough to
handle it but that you can actually
cause brain damage
just by not showing a child enough
affection
and
that is so scary the way that things
will hard wire and then somebody's life
is entirely dictated by that this this
is coming back to why i find your
writing so powerful is
dude the number of people that i meet
that are trapped in their own mind by
something that happened to them
something that they did whatever that
they're not able to get any sort of
cathartic resolution on it's really
scary it's a it's a terrifying percent i
won't guess what it is but it's enough
to to
really be stressful
like just to think that it exists in the
world is so
hard
and
this kind of bridges to
when when we talk about art as a kind of
or creative process as a way of fixing
people i always bridle at that
because
on a really basic level who am i
to
recognize your problem and then to
try to fix your problem
you know that would be that seems really
arrogant
uh
but what
i can buy into what i can accept
is that you can
shock people or you can show them
something so fresh and new that it pops
them out of their drama for a moment
and it shows them
that the world
can be fantastically
unpredictable and not what they think
it's going to be
uh years ago
i was in the dollar store
and i've written about this there was a
guy he was on the short side but he was
wearing a really great coat a really
snazzy coat
and i saw that coat and i was just so
taken with it
and that's why i noticed that no matter
where i went in the dollar store he was
kind of shadowing me he was
in my line of sight
and finally he approached me and i
thought oh he's going to be a reader
and he said
before i could say anything before i
could do the whole gracious oh thank you
for reading my work
this is always wonderful to hear
[__]
he said
a few years ago you did an event
one of your adult bedtime stories event
and everyone was supposed to come in
pajamas
and i bought a ticket
and my brother died that day
and i wasn't close to anybody like i was
close to my brother
and i was just devastated
and i was in shock
but i still had this ticket and i was
just sleepwalking
you know i left my father my my
brother's funeral
and i came to your event
and i was standing in a line on the
sidewalk waiting to come in
and you came down the sidewalk in a
bathrobe in pajamas
with your arms full of these huge
carnival stuffed animals
and you gave me a giant five-foot
stuffed penguin
and he said in that moment
when you gave me this penguin
it shocked me out of all of my sadness
and i realized that life was worth
living that life would offer me
surprises that i could not conceive of
that there would still be things that
would surprise and dazzle and delight me
my life wasn't over
just by the gesture of being given this
huge
penguin
and
i was i was left speechless in the
dollar store i was just so shocked and
and moved really deeply moved
and i think that
ideally that's that's really what i want
to do is just not fix someone not sort
of show them a new improved way of being
but to just to show them the whole
spectrum of what was possible in
existence
that it's not just screwed down to these
these small options that you've decided
on when you were three years old
because when you were three years old
something happened and you decided that
that's how the world was and that's how
you were going to be in relation to the
world
i want to show them something that sort
of busts open
you know
what they think the world is going to be
and the first time i saw harold and
maude
that was the feeling
i was dumbfounded i'd never seen a movie
like that
it was so dark and so funny and left me
so
jazzed at the end
and there have been certain performance
pieces i've seen that did the same thing
for me
um
so in lieu of fixing somebody
i always kind of strive to kind of
present them
with
something that is going to make them
excited about living
blah blah blah
i love that you cap off like this
extraordinarily deep
with blah blah blah
dude that is a great place to end that
is uh
[__]
i love that
what a great uh thing to endeavor to do
i think you do it in spades
where can people connect with you your
book tours are a sight to behold i hope
that we get back to those asap
but where in the meantime can people
follow you engage with you
you know there's uh chuck palahniuk.net
uh
is uh
the biggest fan site uh run by dennis
god bless dennis
and uh
um i think all the usual social media
i'm not much of a social media person
but i do like to sort of plug the things
i believe in
uh
so
you know i think instagram i think i'm
on instagram and facebook
so
but checkpoint.net is the the main place
amazing well brother thank you so much
for taking the time i can say with all
sincerity in the world i am so glad you
exist i am so glad that you put your
work out into the world it is amazing uh
so again just grateful to get to spend
some time with you and speaking of
things to be grateful for if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you very much
[Music]
you